<br/><br/><u><b>16.Pegmatite</b></u><br/><br/>
Pegmatite is a plutonic rock with exceptionally large
crystals. It forms at a late stage in the solidification
of granite bodies.Pegmatite is a rock type based purely
on grain size. Generally pegmatite is defined as a rock
bearing abundant interlocking crystals 3 centimeters 
and larger. However, most pegmatite bodies consist 
largely of quartz and feldspar and are associated with
granitic rocks.Pegmatite bodies are thought to form 
predominantly in granites during their final stage of
solidification. The final fraction of mineral material
is high in water and often also in elements such as 
fluorine or lithium. This fluid is forced to the edge
of the granite pluton and forms thick veins or pods. 
The fluid apparently solidifies rapidly at relatively
high temperatures, under conditions that favor a few
very large crystals rather than many small ones. The
largest crystal ever found was in a pegmatite, a 
spodumene grain some 14 meters long.Pegmatites are 
sought out by mineral collectors and gemstone miners
not only for their large crystals, but for their 
examples of rare minerals. The pegmatite in this 
ornamental boulder near Denver, Colorado, features 
large books of biotite and blocks of alkali feldspar.
<br/><br/>